# Puzzling Evidence

Principles can be formulated, but they're not the perennial philosophy,
and its name can be praised, but that's not lasting glory.
道可道非常道
名可名非常名

The author of heaven and earth is beyond glory,
but mother nature is glorious.
無名天地之始
有名萬物之母

So an abiding indifference reveals her wonders
just as constant craving reveals how to praise her.
故常無欲以觀其妙
常有欲以觀其徼

These couplets complement but also contradict,
and together, they're Xuan, a mystery.
Mystery within mystery,
evidence of infinite wonder.
此兩者同出而異名
同謂之玄
玄之又玄
衆妙之門


# Notes

https://ctext.org/dao-de-jing#n11592

This chapter
is a primer on how to read the book and observe Dao,
an explanation of why the book was written,
and a pointer to three important mysteries.

The book is
a celebration of 萬物之母,
the mother of ten-thousand things,
the wholesome,
self-sustaining,
abiding female principle,
the all-mother,
maybe mother nature.

The method of reading the poems and observing Dao
is dispassionate observation that waits quietly
as some things stay constant and others change.
Subtle relationships emerge,
names are invoked,
and everything flows from there.

The poem defines 玄 as (I think)
the first three couplets together.
The book is full of these
dense, flexible, memorable little ditties
and I think this poem
points out how special this one is,
and also might define 玄 in general
as a puzzle,
a group of expressions
that complement and contradict each other.
玄 are moral sudoku
that are meant to be carried around in your head
and contemplated until choices are made
and a solution emerges.

This poem defines 玄 alone,
but the book contains other named 玄 sayings,
and I think this poem points out that they're special.
玄牝 in 6 is the mystery of the female principle,
玄德 in 10, 51 and 65 is the secret of doing the right thing,
and 玄同 in 56 is the investigation into the principle of equivalence.
