https://ctext.org/dao-de-jing#n11655

It's stable and easy to sustain,
predictable and easy to plan,
fragile and easily shattered,
skittish and easily scattered.
其安易持
其未兆易謀
其脆易泮
其微易散

Handle it before it happens,
fix it before it falls apart.
為之於未有
治之於未亂

A tree this big around
grew from a tiny sprout.
A tower nine stories high
rose from a pile of dirt.
A journey of a thousand miles
starts with a single step.
合抱之木生於毫末
九層之臺起於累土
千里之行始於足下

Running things ruins them,
holding on chases them away,
so the wise don't do anything
so they don't ruin anything,
and don't keep anything
so they don't lose anything.
為者敗之
執者失之
是以聖人無為故無敗
無執故無失

When there's work to do,
people often fail just as they're about to succeed,
so they tell us
to be as careful at the end
as we were at the beginning
so we don't waste effort.
民之從事
常於幾成而敗之
慎終如始則無敗事

So the wise try not to want anything,
and they don't appreciate the finer things.
They learn not to conform
and they ignore what everyone else says
so they can affirm everything’s true nature
and they wouldn't dare tell us what to do. 
是以聖人
欲不欲不貴難得之貨
學不學復衆人之所過
以輔萬物之自然而不敢為

# Notes

The hanzi is mostly based on Wangbi,
but I've added particles from Guodian,
and I've imported few characters
from Mawangdui (故曰 and 能).

This poem is in two parts in Guodian,
so it's possible that this was originally
two different poems,
with the split following
the tree/tower/journey sayings.
(Guodian contains two versions
of the second half of the poem,
the only redundancy found in Guodian.)

The sayings before the tree/tower/journey sayings,
are very pithy and rhymey,
and I've tried to reproduce
their pithiness and rhyminess
with alliteration.
I think it works quite well,
and I don't think
I've lost much of the plot,
if any.

"This big around,"
is literally 合抱,
so tiny sprouts end up
an arm's embrace around.
Nice,
but I don't know
how to make that work in English,
and I like the idea of gestures
that go along with the sayings.

In Guodian,
the tree/tower/journey sayings
all imply upward motion.
The tree grows,
the tower rises,
and the person climbs a hundred steps
instead of travelling a thousand 里.
I've kept the more traditional saying
for the sake of familiarity,
and I've changed the literal,
"Starts from beneath your feet,"
(始於足下)
to, "Starts with a single step,"
simply because people are used to it
and I think it sounds better.

Note that the first 為/敗 couplet
in the second section of the poem
also appears in
[chapter 29](https://daoistic.ca/studies/29 "Read chapter 29"),
but I've interpreted it very differently there,
and much less literally.
